=====Linewidth broadening=====

**Jake:**
Further thoughts on the lifetime-to-linewidth issue, and my impression now is that almost everyone is basically half correct. I stand by my claim that a double-sided exponential with half-width-at-1/e-height of tau has a Fourier-transformed Lorentzian profile with FWHM of :math:`\\frac{1}{\pi \tau}`. However, the data we get from a lifetime measurement are intensities, which is the square of the electric field. Hence, an intensity profile of the form $\exp \left( \frac{-t}{\tau} \right)$ corresponds to an electric field with amplitude profile $\exp \left( \frac{-t}{2\tau} \right)$, and it is this function which ought to be Fourier-transformed into the frequency domain, giving a Lorentzian profile with FHWM of $\frac{1}{2 \pi \tau}$. So it is correct to say that you do an intensity measurement and extract the value tau which yields a FT limited linewidth of $\frac{1}{2 \pi \tau}$, but it is NOT correct to explain this as due entirely to the Fourier transform, since there is an implicit step where you infer the exponential constant $2 \tau$ of the electric field profile. More info in the attached pdf


**Milos:**
They key point there is that collisional broadening perturbs the lifetime of the excited state - i.e., a collision causes a phase interruption in the emission & the broadening is Lorentzian for the same reason as the natural linewidth.

An apparent problem with this explanation is that, at a fundamental level, pressure/collisions/strain also give rise to a Stark shift. In fact, collisional broadening is sometimes described as follows: ".........Alternatively, one can think of the ions, atoms and electrons in a dense gas as creating an average external electric field around a radiating atom. This quasi-static Stark effect then perturbs the energy levels of the radiating atom and gives rise to Lorentzian line broadening. This is the reason why pressure broadening is sometimes called Stark broadening.........." -- so, you see the apparent contradiction. I think they key difference is that a collisional process (such as phonon dephasing) causes a lifetime interruption (i.e. it stimulates emission), whereas Stark shifts caused by charge/field fluctuations do not cause a lifetime interruption - they only cause shifts in energy levels, and the reason for the Gaussian shape there is simple/intuitive (as we discussed).


**Jake:**
Reading through p43-45 of “Principles of Lasers” by Orazio Svelto, homogeneous linewidth broadening due to collisions is covered for gases and solids in the same analysis, where the “collisions” in the solid are the interactions between the radiating atom and the phonons of the lattice. He writes that the effect of collisions is to cause a random phase jump in the two-level wavefunctions relative to the incident excitation laser. It is assumed that there is an average time tau_c between collisions, and that the distribution of the time between successive collisions decays exponentially, i.e. has the form $\textrm{Prob}(\tau) = \frac{1}{\tau_c} \exp \left( \frac{-\tau}{\tau_c} \right)$.
Getting from there to the spectral lineshape is a non-trivial derivation that he shifts to the appendix. It involves calculating the autocorrelation function of a monochromatic oscillation in the electric field which features random phase jumps. The field is assumed to have the form $E(t) = E_0 \exp \left(i (\omega t - \phi(t))\right)$, where $\phi(t)$ describes the collision-induced phase jumps. The autocorrelation function then has the form $G(t) = (E_0)^2 \exp \left( i \omega t - \frac{|t|}{\tau_c} \right)$, and the $\exp \left( \frac{-|t|}{\tau_c} \right)$ part comes in at a step where the average time between collisions is replaced by an expression involving $\textrm{Prob}(\tau)$ as defined above. Then it is $G(t)$ which is Fourier-transformed to give the spectral lineshape function, which happens to be Lorentzian.
So, from this my understanding is that the Lorentzian lineshape comes from the fact that we are Fourier-transforming a double exponential, but that exponential comes from the assumption that phonon interactions cause phase jumps and those phase jumps are separated in time according to an exponential distribution.

**Milos:**
Makes sense. The analyses I was reading are not for lasers nor for solids, but the basic argument is the same. Two main points: (1) A collision modulates the lifetime by triggering an emission (i.e., causes a phase shift/interruption). (2) The histogram of time intervals between collisions is exponential and so the broadening is Lorentzian for the same reason as lifetime broadening (FT of an exponential = Lorentzian).

PS> The "fact" that the distribution of time intervals between collisions is exponential comes from an analysis of collisions in an ideal gas (the derivation can be found in texts on statistical physics & thermodynamics). The "assumption" here is that collisions with phonons are not different/biased in some way that modifies the exponential distribution.
